README.md, before:

# Supplementary Analytical Material to "Early effects of 2014 U.S. Medicaid expansions on mortality: Design-based inference for impacts on small subgroups despite small-cell suppression"

## Contributors

- Charlotte Z. Mann
- Ben B. Hansen ([benbhansen-stats](https://github.com/benbhansen-stats))
- Timothy Lycurgus ([timlycurgus](https://github.com/timlycurgus))
- Lauren Gaydosh ([lgaydosh](https://github.com/lgaydosh))

## Contents

- `analysis/` all scripts - numbers and letters indicate the order in which scripts should be run

  - 00: scripts containing helper functions

      - `00-balance-helpers.R`
      - `00-outliers-helpers.R`
      - `00-read-icd10.R`

  - 01: scripts reading in and cleaning baseline covariates and combining them

    - `01a-base-mortality.R`
    - `01a-state-data-reporting.R`
    - `01b-base-health-ahrf.R`
    - `01c-base-partisanship.R`
    - `01d-base-ihme.R`
    - `01d-base-household.R`
    - `01d-medicaid-exp.R`
    - `01e-base-combined.R`

  - 02: scripts reading in and cleaning mortality and population data for outcome analysis
    + data for main outcome analysis
      - `02-mort-det.R`
      - `02-pop-2013-14.R`  
    + data for EDA and sensitivity analyses
      - `02-mort-det-0514.R`
      - `02-mort-det-65.R`
      - `02-mort-unabm-cause.R`
      - `02-pop-2005-14.R`
      - `02-pop-2015-19.R`
      - `02-pop-65.R`

  - 03: matching analysis and figures presented in protocol (Observational Studies)

    - `03a-sd-calc.R`
    - `03b-matching.R`
    - `03c-protocol-figures.R`

  - 04: exploration of censoring, reporting lag, and race and ethnicity

    - `04-calc-state-lag.R`
    - `04-cdc-2020-mort.R`
    - `04-cdc-censored-counties.R`
    - `04-race-dist-county.R`

  - 10: preparing data for covariate adjustment models

    - `10-cov-adj-dat-comb.R`
    - `10-mort-pop-comb-2018.R`

  - 11-13: outcome analysis
    - `11-cov-adj-mod.R`
    - `12-caclulate-m.R`
    - `12-partial-order-helpers.R`
    - `12a-conf-int-fun.R`
    - `13-test-stat-calc.R`

  - 14: outcome analysis and exploratory figures
    - `14-eda-figures.R`
    - `14-result-figures.R`

  - 20-22: censored outcome analysis
    - `20-wonder-explore-censoring.R`
    - `20-wonder-helpers.R`
    - `21-wonder-analysis.R`
    - `22-wonder-results.R`

  - 30: paper calculations and figures
    - `30-balance-eval.R`
    - `30-matching-close-figs.R`
    - `30-matching-close-propensity.R`
    - `30-mort-trends.R`
    - `30-placebo-tests.R`
    - `30-sensitivity-analysis.R`
    - `30-subgroup.R`
    - `30-toy-example.R`
    - `30-trimmed-counties.R`
    - `30-wonder-paper-figs.R`

  - 99: additional scripts
    - `99-demo-Zty-based-pvals.R`

- `data/` our data artifacts
  - Includes data artifacts that can be publicly shared

- `raw_data/` input data files
  + Most publicly available data inputs are included
  + See "Raw Data" below

- `reference/` data documentation, etc.
- `R/` helper functions for cumulant calculations
- `lib/` local package library


## Raw Data

Data files with a DUA that doesn't permit free sharing are not included.  Other raw data files are stored in `raw_data`.

Input files that are not included due to size or a DUA, but can be downloaded:

- `raw_data/cc-est2019-alldata.csv`: Annual County Resident Population Estimates by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2019 from the US Census Bureau downloaded from https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-kits/2020/population-estimates-detailed.html
- `raw_data/AHRF2019.acs`: 2018-2019 County Level AHRF data downloaded from https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download
- `raw_data/AHRF2020/AHRF2020.acs`: 2019-2020 County Level AHRF data downloaded from https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download
- `raw_data/pres_2008_2016.csv`: Election data, which contributes to the \% Republican variable, downloaded from [CQ Press Voting and Elections Collection](http://library.cqpress.com/elections/download-data.php) (access through the University of Michigan library). See `reference/notes` for download selections.


Input files that are not included and would need to be requested from the NCHS/CDC through a NCHS restricted data request ([link](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/nvss-restricted-data.htm)):

- `pop9914.txt`: county-level population from 1999-2014
- `mort9914.txt`: Compressed Mortality Files - All Counties from 1999-2014
- `MULT[year].USAllCnty.txt`: Detailed Mortality Files (Multiple Causes of Death) - All Counties

## R Package Setup


Project specific R package sources go into lib/sources . Then they're installed to an appropriate subdirectory of lib/R . You'll need to create that subdirectory; analysis/.Rprofile indicates where it needs to go.  To install such a package, start R from analysis/ and do e.g.

    install.packages("../lib/source/RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz", repos=NULL)

(Starting R from within analysis/ has the side effect of loading analysis/.Rprofile on startup; read that file to see what this means.) Troubleshooting:

1. Confirm that you did start R from within analysis/, via `getwd()`.
2. Confirm that the package tarball (e.g. RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz) exists at lib/source/RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz .
3. If the `install.packages()` fails with an error message about dependency packages about not being found, try installing the release version from CRAN, then installing the development version over the released version:



    install.packages("RItools", repos="https://cran.case.edu")

    install.packages("../lib/source RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz", repos=NULL)

    packageVersion("RItools") # should be 0.2.0.9003 in this example

Another valid approach would be to jot down the dependency packages it asked for, then feed them directly into `install.packages(., repos="https://your.cran.preference.edu")`.

Commit message:

Adding an overview to the README clarifying which data is included in the repo

README.md, after:

# Supplementary Analytical Material to "Early effects of 2014 U.S. Medicaid expansions on mortality: Design-based inference for impacts on small subgroups despite small-cell suppression"

## Contributors

- Charlotte Z. Mann ([manncz](https://github.com/manncz))
- Ben B. Hansen ([benbhansen-stats](https://github.com/benbhansen-stats))
- Lauren Gaydosh ([lgaydosh](https://github.com/lgaydosh))
- Timothy Lycurgus ([timlycurgus](https://github.com/timlycurgus))

## Overview

This repository contains all of the replication scripts supporting the analyses in "Early effects of 2014 U.S. Medicaid expansions on mortality: Design-based inference for impacts on small subgroups despite small-cell suppression," Charlotte Z. Mann, Ben B. Hansen, and Lauren Gaydosh (2024).

Scripts rely on both **publicly available** and **restricted-access** data. All publicly available data files are included in the repository, while restricted-access (or large) files are not included. References to data files that could not be shared still remain in the scripts, so not all scripts can be run fully, without accessing those files independently. Instructions for accessing the files not included in the respository can be found in the [Raw Data](#raw-data) section of this document.


## Contents

- `analysis/` all scripts - numbers and letters indicate the order in which scripts should be run

  - 00: scripts containing helper functions

      - `00-balance-helpers.R`
      - `00-outliers-helpers.R`
      - `00-read-icd10.R`

  - 01: scripts reading in and cleaning baseline covariates and combining them

    - `01a-base-mortality.R`
    - `01a-state-data-reporting.R`
    - `01b-base-health-ahrf.R`
    - `01c-base-partisanship.R`
    - `01d-base-ihme.R`
    - `01d-base-household.R`
    - `01d-medicaid-exp.R`
    - `01e-base-combined.R`

  - 02: scripts reading in and cleaning mortality and population data for outcome analysis
    + data for main outcome analysis
      - `02-mort-det.R`
      - `02-pop-2013-14.R`  
    + data for EDA and sensitivity analyses
      - `02-mort-det-0514.R`
      - `02-mort-det-65.R`
      - `02-mort-unabm-cause.R`
      - `02-pop-2005-14.R`
      - `02-pop-2015-19.R`
      - `02-pop-65.R`

  - 03: matching analysis and figures presented in study protocol (Observational Studies, 2021)

    - `03a-sd-calc.R`
    - `03b-matching.R`
    - `03c-protocol-figures.R`

  - 04: exploration of censoring, reporting lag, and race and ethnicity

    - `04-calc-state-lag.R`
    - `04-cdc-2020-mort.R`
    - `04-cdc-censored-counties.R`
    - `04-race-dist-county.R`

  - 10: preparing data for covariate adjustment models

    - `10-cov-adj-dat-comb.R`
    - `10-mort-pop-comb-2018.R`

  - 11-13: outcome analysis
    - `11-cov-adj-mod.R`
    - `12-caclulate-m.R`
    - `12-partial-order-helpers.R`
    - `12a-conf-int-fun.R`
    - `13-test-stat-calc.R`

  - 14: outcome analysis and exploratory figures
    - `14-eda-figures.R`
    - `14-result-figures.R`

  - 20-22: censored outcome analysis
    - `20-wonder-explore-censoring.R`
    - `20-wonder-helpers.R`
    - `21-wonder-analysis.R`
    - `22-wonder-results.R`

  - 30: paper calculations and figures
    - `30-balance-eval.R`
    - `30-matching-close-figs.R`
    - `30-matching-close-propensity.R`
    - `30-mort-trends.R`
    - `30-placebo-tests.R`
    - `30-sensitivity-analysis.R`
    - `30-subgroup.R`
    - `30-toy-example.R`
    - `30-trimmed-counties.R`
    - `30-wonder-paper-figs.R`

  - 99: additional scripts
    - `99-demo-Zty-based-pvals.R`

- `data/` our data artifacts
  - Includes data artifacts that can be publicly shared

- `raw_data/` input data files
  + Most publicly available data inputs are included
  + See [Raw Data](#raw-data) below

- `reference/` data documentation, etc.
- `R/` helper functions for cumulant calculations
- `lib/` local package library


## Raw Data

Data files with a DUA that doesn't permit free sharing are not included.  Other raw data files are stored in `raw_data`.

Input files that are not included due to size or a DUA, but can be downloaded:

- `raw_data/cc-est2019-alldata.csv`: Annual County Resident Population Estimates by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2019 from the US Census Bureau downloaded from https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-kits/2020/population-estimates-detailed.html
- `raw_data/AHRF2019.acs`: 2018-2019 County Level AHRF data downloaded from https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download
- `raw_data/AHRF2020/AHRF2020.acs`: 2019-2020 County Level AHRF data downloaded from https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download
- `raw_data/pres_2008_2016.csv`: Election data, which contributes to the \% Republican variable, downloaded from [CQ Press Voting and Elections Collection](http://library.cqpress.com/elections/download-data.php) (access through the University of Michigan library). See `reference/notes` for download selections.


Input files that are not included and would need to be requested from the NCHS/CDC through a NCHS restricted data request ([link](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/nvss-restricted-data.htm)):

- `pop9914.txt`: county-level population from 1999-2014
- `mort9914.txt`: Compressed Mortality Files - All Counties from 1999-2014
- `MULT[year].USAllCnty.txt`: Detailed Mortality Files (Multiple Causes of Death) - All Counties

## R Package Setup


Project specific R package sources go into lib/sources . Then they're installed to an appropriate subdirectory of lib/R . You'll need to create that subdirectory; analysis/.Rprofile indicates where it needs to go.  To install such a package, start R from analysis/ and do e.g.

    install.packages("../lib/source/RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz", repos=NULL)

(Starting R from within analysis/ has the side effect of loading analysis/.Rprofile on startup; read that file to see what this means.) Troubleshooting:

1. Confirm that you did start R from within analysis/, via `getwd()`.
2. Confirm that the package tarball (e.g. RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz) exists at lib/source/RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz .
3. If the `install.packages()` fails with an error message about dependency packages about not being found, try installing the release version from CRAN, then installing the development version over the released version:



    install.packages("RItools", repos="https://cran.case.edu")

    install.packages("../lib/source RItools_0.2.0.9003.tar.gz", repos=NULL)

    packageVersion("RItools") # should be 0.2.0.9003 in this example

Another valid approach would be to jot down the dependency packages it asked for, then feed them directly into `install.packages(., repos="https://your.cran.preference.edu")`.
